Allow packages with multiple build-systems (separate classes) (#30738)
LLNL/spack: lib/spack/docs/packaging_guide.rst

language and has many powerful features to help make package writing
easy.

.. _installation_procedure:

--------------------------------------
Overview of the installation procedure
--------------------------------------

Whenever Spack installs software, it goes through a series of predefined steps:

.. image:: images/installation_pipeline.png
  :scale: 60 %
  :align: center

All these steps are influenced by the metadata in each ``package.py`` and
by the current Spack configuration.
Since build-systems are different from one another, the execution of the

> last block in the figure is further expanded in a build-system specific way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since build systems are different from one another, the execution of the
last block in the figure is further expanded in a build system specific way.
```

An example for ``CMake`` is, for instance:

.. image:: images/builder_phases.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60 %

> The predefined steps for each build-system are called "phases".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The predefined steps for each build system are called "phases".
```

In general, the name and order in which the phases will be executed can be
obtained by either reading the API docs at :py:mod:`~.spack.build_systems`, or
using the ``spack info`` command:

.. code-block:: console
    :emphasize-lines: 13,14

    $ spack info --phases m4
    AutotoolsPackage:    m4
    Homepage:            https://www.gnu.org/software/m4/m4.html

    Safe versions:
        1.4.17    ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/m4/m4-1.4.17.tar.gz

    Variants:
        Name       Default   Description

        sigsegv    on        Build the libsigsegv dependency

    Installation Phases:
        autoreconf    configure    build    install

    Build Dependencies:
        libsigsegv

    ...

> An extensive list of available build-systems and phases is provided in :ref:`installation_process`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An extensive list of available build systems and phases is provided in :ref:`installation_process`.
```
Might be better to just link to the Build System docs.

------------------------
Writing a package recipe
------------------------

> Since v0.19, Spack allows  two ways to write a package recipe. The most used is to encode both the metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since v0.19, Spack supports two ways of writing a package recipe. The most commonly used is to encode both the metadata
```

       version("2.4.0", sha256="8702ba68b442657f11aaeb2b338443ca8d5fb95b0d845757968a7be31ef7f16d")

       variant("codec", default=False, description="Build the CODEC executables")
       depends_on("libpng", when="+codec")

       def url_for_version(self, version):
           if version >= Version("2.1.1"):
               return super(Openjpeg, self).url_for_version(version)
           url_fmt = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/version.{0}.tar.gz"
           return url_fmt.format(version)

       def cmake_args(self):
           args = [
               self.define_from_variant("BUILD_CODEC", "codec"),
               self.define("BUILD_MJ2", False),
               self.define("BUILD_THIRDPARTY", False),
           ]
           return args

A package encoded with a single class is backward compatible with versions of Spack
lower than v0.19, and so are custom repositories containing only recipes of this kind.
The downside is that *this format doesn't allow packagers to use more than one build-systems in a single recipe*.

To do that we have to resort to the second way Spack has of writing packages, which involves writing a

> builder class explicitly. Using the same example as above this reads:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, we have to resort to the second way Spack has of writing packages, which involves writing a
builder class explicitly. Using the same example as above, this reads:
```

.. code-block:: python

   class Openjpeg(CMakePackage):
       """OpenJPEG is an open-source JPEG 2000 codec written in C language"""

       homepage = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg"
       url = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/v2.3.1.tar.gz"

       version("2.4.0", sha256="8702ba68b442657f11aaeb2b338443ca8d5fb95b0d845757968a7be31ef7f16d")

       variant("codec", default=False, description="Build the CODEC executables")
       depends_on("libpng", when="+codec")

       def url_for_version(self, version):
           if version >= Version("2.1.1"):
               return super(Openjpeg, self).url_for_version(version)
           url_fmt = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/version.{0}.tar.gz"
           return url_fmt.format(version)

   class CMakeBuilder(spack.build_systems.cmake.CMakeBuilder):
       def cmake_args(self):
           args = [
               self.define_from_variant("BUILD_CODEC", "codec"),
               self.define("BUILD_MJ2", False),
               self.define("BUILD_THIRDPARTY", False),
           ]
           return args

> This way of writing packages allows extending the recipe to support multiple build-systems,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way of writing packages allows extending the recipe to support multiple build systems,
```

see :ref:`multiple_build_systems` for more details. The downside is that recipes of this kind

> are only understood by Spack since v0.19. More information on the internal architecture of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are only understood by Spack since v0.19+. More information on the internal architecture of
```

last block in the figure is further expanded in a build-system specific way.
An example for ``CMake`` is, for instance:

.. image:: images/builder_phases.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60 %

The predefined steps for each build-system are called "phases".
In general, the name and order in which the phases will be executed can be
obtained by either reading the API docs at :py:mod:`~.spack.build_systems`, or
using the ``spack info`` command:

.. code-block:: console
    :emphasize-lines: 13,14

    $ spack info --phases m4
    AutotoolsPackage:    m4
    Homepage:            https://www.gnu.org/software/m4/m4.html

    Safe versions:
        1.4.17    ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/m4/m4-1.4.17.tar.gz

    Variants:
        Name       Default   Description

        sigsegv    on        Build the libsigsegv dependency

    Installation Phases:
        autoreconf    configure    build    install

    Build Dependencies:
        libsigsegv

    ...

An extensive list of available build-systems and phases is provided in :ref:`installation_process`.

.. _package_class_structure:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Package class structure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Packages in Spack have been originally designed to support only a single build-system. The overall

Reviewer 2: I'd rephrase this to remove the "historical" part: just say that if the package only needs one build system, then it can inherit directly and define methods of interest in the package class, and if it needs multiple then it needs the builder.

Author: See https://github.com/spack/spack/pull/30738#discussion_r1003199251

class structure for a package looked like:

.. image:: images/original_package_architecture.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

In this architecture the base class ``AutotoolsPackage`` was responsible for both the metadata
related to the ``autotools`` build-system (e.g. dependencies or variants common to all packages
using it), and for encoding the default installation procedure. *This structure still works for
most of the packages, and is what gets generated by default when Spack creates a new package*,
see :ref:`cmd-spack-create`.

In reality, multiple packages are either changing their build-system during the evolution of the

> project, or using different build-systems for different platforms. An architecture like the one

Reviewer 2: This phrasing implies that it is common for a package to need multiple build systems, but for now (and I think in the future as well) it is the less-common case.

Author: That was not the intent. The intent was really to say that there is a fair number of packages in that category, and that our current architecture[^1] fails at modeling a package that uses more than one build system.

[^1]: The single-class package

Author: Reworked docs, put the historical perspective at the end of the "Packaging guide". Also rephrased "multiple packages" to "a non-negligible number of packages".

   class Openjpeg(CMakePackage):
       """OpenJPEG is an open-source JPEG 2000 codec written in C language"""

       homepage = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg"
       url = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/v2.3.1.tar.gz"

       version("2.4.0", sha256="8702ba68b442657f11aaeb2b338443ca8d5fb95b0d845757968a7be31ef7f16d")

       variant("codec", default=False, description="Build the CODEC executables")
       depends_on("libpng", when="+codec")

       def url_for_version(self, version):
           if version >= Version("2.1.1"):
               return super(Openjpeg, self).url_for_version(version)
           url_fmt = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/version.{0}.tar.gz"
           return url_fmt.format(version)

       def cmake_args(self):
           args = [
               self.define_from_variant("BUILD_CODEC", "codec"),
               self.define("BUILD_MJ2", False),
               self.define("BUILD_THIRDPARTY", False),
           ]
           return args

Encoding a package with a single class makes the recipe backward compatible with
versions of Spack lower than v0.19, and as of now there is no plan to deprecate this

> format. *Using this format though a package cannot support multiple build-systems.*

Reviewer 2: Rephrase

> Using this format though a package cannot support multiple build-systems.

to

> If a package uses this format, it cannot support multiple build systems.

Author: Done

The second way to write a package is to encode a builder class explicitly.
Using the same example as above this reads:

.. code-block:: python

   class Openjpeg(CMakePackage):
       """OpenJPEG is an open-source JPEG 2000 codec written in C language"""

       homepage = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg"
       url = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/v2.3.1.tar.gz"

       version("2.4.0", sha256="8702ba68b442657f11aaeb2b338443ca8d5fb95b0d845757968a7be31ef7f16d")

       variant("codec", default=False, description="Build the CODEC executables")
       depends_on("libpng", when="+codec")

       def url_for_version(self, version):
           if version >= Version("2.1.1"):
               return super(Openjpeg, self).url_for_version(version)
           url_fmt = "https://github.com/uclouvain/openjpeg/archive/version.{0}.tar.gz"
           return url_fmt.format(version)

>    class CMakeBuilder(spack.build_systems.cmake.CMakeBuilder):

Reviewer 2: It's worth mentioning that the name you choose is prescribed based on what class you inherit (e.g. if you inherit `CMakePackage`, then you must define a builder called `CMakeBuilder`).

for ``~python``.  Other than using a little extra disk space, that
solution has no serious problems.

.. _installation_process:

--------------------------------

> Overriding build-system defaults

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overriding build system defaults
```

--------------------------------

.. note::

>    If you code a single-class in ``package.py`` all the functions shown in the table below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you code a single class in ``package.py`` all the functions shown in the table below
```

   can be implemented with the same signature on the ``*Package`` instead of the corresponding builder.

> Most of the time the default implementation of methods or attributes in build-system base classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time the default implementation of methods or attributes in build system base classes
```

is what a packager needs, and just a very few entities need to be overwritten. Typically we just
need to override methods like ``configure_args``:

.. code-block:: python

   def configure_args(self):
        args = ["--enable-cxx"] + self.enable_or_disable("libs")
        if "libs=static" in self.spec:
            args.append("--with-pic")
        return args

The actual set of entities available for overriding in ``package.py`` depend on

> the build-system. The build-systems currently supported by Spack are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the build system. The build systems currently supported by Spack are:
```
Personally I would remove this table and link to the Build System docs, those are more likely to stay up to date.

Author: I'll leave the table there for now. We can revisit later.

+----------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+

> |     **API docs**                                         |           **Description**        |

Reviewer: I think Base Class makes more sense here

Author: It doesn't. It's a link to the Python module, which has at least two classes (the `*Package` and the `*Builder`).

+==========================================================+==================================+

> | :class:`~spack.build_systems.generic`                    | Generic build-system without any |

Reviewer: I'm going to stop commenting, just `sed -i '' 's/build-system/build system/g'`

        In most cases packagers don't have to worry about the selection of the right base class
        for a package, as ``spack create`` will make the appropriate choice on their behalf. In those
        rare cases where manual intervention is needed we need to stress that a

>         package base class depends on the *build-system* being used, not the language of the package.

Reviewer 2: (minor) keep this unhyphenated ("build system")

The arguments ``spec`` and ``prefix`` are passed only for convenience, as they always
correspond to ``self.spec`` and ``self.spec.prefix`` respectively.

If the ``package.py`` encodes builders explicitly, the signature for a phase changes slightly:

.. code-block:: python

   class CMakeBuilder(spack.build_systems.cmake.CMakeBuilder):
       def install(self, pkg, spec, prefix):
           ...

In this case the package is passed as the second argument, and ``self`` is the builder instance.

.. _multiple_build_systems:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Multiple build-systems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are cases where a software actively supports two build-systems, or changes build-systems
as it evolves, or needs different build-systems on different platforms. Spack allows dealing with
these cases natively, if a recipe is written using builders explicitly.

> For instance, a software that supports two build-systems unconditionally should derive from

Reviewer: "a software library", or just "software"

both ``*Package`` base classes, and declare the possible use of multiple build-systems using
a directive:

.. code-block:: python

   class ArpackNg(CMakePackage, AutotoolsPackage):

       build_system("cmake", "autotools", default="cmake")

In this case the software can be built with both ``autotools`` and ``cmake``. Since the package
supports multiple build-systems, it is necessary to declare which one is the default. The ``package.py``
will likely contain some overriding of default builder methods:

.. code-block:: python

   class CMakeBuilder(spack.build_systems.cmake.CMakeBuilder):
       def cmake_args(self):
           pass

>    class Autotoolsbuilder(spack.build_systems.cmake.AutotoolsBuilder):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   class Autotoolsbuilder(spack.build_systems.autotools.AutotoolsBuilder):
```

       def configure_args(self):
           pass

In more complex cases it might happen that the build-system changes according to certain conditions,
for instance across versions. That can be expressed with conditional variant values:

.. code-block:: python

   class ArpackNg(CMakePackage, AutotoolsPackage):

       build_system(
           conditional("cmake", when="@0.64:"),
           conditional("autotools", when="@:0.63"),
           default="cmake",
       )

In the example the directive impose a change from ``Autotools`` to ``CMake`` going

> from ``v0.63`` to ``v0.64``.

Reviewer: Can you also include an example where build system is dependent on OS? I guess that would look something like:
```python
build_system(
    conditional("autotools", when="platform=linux"),
    conditional("autotools", when="platform=darwin"),
    conditional("autotools", when="platform=cray"),
    "cmake",
)

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Mixin base classes

Reviewer: Someday I would like to move these to `spack.mixins`, but that can happen another day.

    special type, :py:class:`Prefix <spack.util.prefix.Prefix>`.

The arguments ``spec`` and ``prefix`` are passed only for convenience, as they always

> correspond to ``self.pkg.spec`` and ``self.pkg.spec.prefix`` respectively.

Reviewer 2: In this context you're talking about phase methods in the Package, in which case I think referring to `self.spec` is more accurate.

Author: Done

+---------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| :class:`~spack.build_systems.gnu.GNUMirrorPackage`            | A helper class for GNU packages  |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| :class:`~spack.build_systems.sourceforge.SourceforgePackage`  | A helper class for packages      |
|                                                               | from sourceforge.org             |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| :class:`~spack.build_systems.sourceware.SourcewarePackage`    | A helper class for packages      |
|                                                               | from sourceware.org              |
+---------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| :class:`~spack.build_systems.xorg.XorgPackage`                | A helper class for x.org         |
|                                                               | packages                         |

> +---------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Reviewer 2: (question) should `PythonExtension` go in this list?

Author: Done

Recall the install method from ``libelf``:

.. literalinclude::  _spack_root/var/spack/repos/builtin/packages/libelf/package.py

>    :pyobject: AutotoolsBuilder.install

Reviewer: I don't really see any reason to modify libelf in this PR, it only supports a single build system

Author: It's a leftover from previous changes. I'll fix that.

Many goals were moving targets during the writing of this PR. The entire PR started with the intent that in the long term we would move to the new format only. The doc was written back then. Later we decided to postpone this decision to a later point and I think the sentiment is to keep the current recipes as they are forever, if they don't need multiple build systems.

Needless to say the bad side of this is that we need the adapter code to be around forever :grimacing:

   DWARF_PREFIX = $(spack location --install-dir libdwarf)
   CXXFLAGS += -I$DWARF_PREFIX/include
   CXXFLAGS += -L$DWARF_PREFIX/lib

.. _package_class_structure:

--------------------------
Package class architecture
--------------------------

.. note::

>    This section aims at giving a high-level knowledge of how the package class architecture evolved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This section aims to provide high-level knowledge of how the package class architecture evolved
```

   in Spack, and provides some insights on the current design.

> Packages in Spack have been originally designed to support only a single build-system. The overall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Packages in Spack were originally designed to support only a single build-system. The overall
```

> class structure for a package looked like:

Reviewer: Technically, originally, there was only `Package`. Build system specific classes were added much later

.. image:: images/original_package_architecture.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

In this architecture the base class ``AutotoolsPackage`` was responsible for both the metadata
related to the ``autotools`` build-system (e.g. dependencies or variants common to all packages
using it), and for encoding the default installation procedure.

In reality, a non-negligible number of packages are either changing their build-system during the evolution of the
project, or using different build-systems for different platforms. An architecture based on a single class

> allows to deal with these cases only by employing workarounds and possibly by repeating code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires hacks or other workarounds to deal with these cases.
```

To support a model more adherent to reality, Spack v0.19 changed its internal design by extracting
the attributes and methods related to building a software into a separate hierarchy:

.. image:: images/builder_package_architecture.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

In this new format each ``package.py`` contains one ``*Package`` class that gathers all the metadata,
and one or more ``*Builder`` classes that encode the installation procedure. A specific builder object
is created just before the software is built, so at a time where Spack knows which build-system needs
to be used for the current installation, and receives a ``package`` object during initialization.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
``build_system`` variant
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To allow imposing conditions based on the build-system, each package must a have ``build_system`` variant,

> which is usually inherited from base classes. This variant allows both to write metadata that is conditional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is usually inherited from base classes. This variant allows for writing metadata that is conditional
```

> to the build-system:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the build-system:
```

.. code-block:: python

   with when("build_system=cmake"):
       depends_on("cmake", type="build")

> and also to select a specific build system from a spec literal, e.g. like in the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and also for selecting a specific build system from a spec literal, like in the following command:
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ spack install arpack-ng build_system=autotools

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Compatibility with single-class format
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Internally, Spack always uses builders to perform operations related to the installation of a specific software.
The builders are created in the ``spack.builder.create`` function

.. literalinclude:: _spack_root/lib/spack/spack/builder.py
   :pyobject: create

To achieve backward compatibility with the single-class format Spack creates in this function a special
"adapter builder", if no custom builder is detected in the recipe:

.. image:: images/adapter.png
   :scale: 60 %
   :align: center

Overall the role of the adapter is to route access to attributes of methods first through the ``*Package``
hierarchy, and then back to the base class builder. This is schematically shown in the diagram above, where

> the adapter role is to "emulate" a method resolution order like the one represented by the red arrows.

Reviewer: A lot of the stuff added here (history, design, implementation) is great, but feels like it should be somewhere else. The Packaging Guide is becoming quite bloated. But we can refactor this in a separate PR. I would rather document this somewhere than nowhere.

Author: Yes, working on docs in a separate PR would be simpler. I have a few small PRs that should follow this one.
